---
title: 'My Experience With God'
date: 2014-10-19
---
Ever since I was a child, I have always found myself questioning the established norms about religion and god. The image of lord Ram with a bow and arrow, lord Krishna with a flute, or lord Ganesha with a elephant head and a bulbous belly are all examples of things that are so natural to one’s imagination. On the evening of Diwali, we used to keep our front door open and light up the whole house hoping for goddess Lakshmi to walk in and bless our home with ceaseless wealth and prosperity and on the evening of Holi, we used to burn the symbol of evil and feel tremendous about it. And this, by the way, is not just our way of living, its actually of most people I knew.

Until I went to college and started by professional life, all these things kept bubbling up in the mind but never substantiated into anything debatable. Also, living in a typical Hindu family, it was also not encouraged to go too far in the direction I kept wandering into. Whenever I talked to other people about how strange I find to believe in the stories of Ramayana and Mahabharata, I used to get answers like — “These dharma-granthas (epics) are thousands of years old. There must me some truth in them, otherwise why would everyone follow them”. I have even had furious arguments about whether airplane was invented by Wright brothers in 1903 or by some guy in the times of Ramayana. What a waste of time.

All this time, due to my inner doubtfulness, I kept paying attention to what everyone really believes in across religions, cultures, geographies, etc. And obviously, I found contrastingly different stories. As any analytical human being, I was looking for common patterns. And it was really easy to identify them from an outside perspective. So once I had more grip on the commonality between many many different beliefs and cultures, I started to juice-out the crux — something that can finally make sense. And things finally did started making sense to me. But it was not something outside the society, it was rather a very much human invention or discovery. May be that is why it made sense to me.

Now was the time to link back the understanding I had back to the common norms. This was the testing stone for my discovery. By discovery, I don’t at all mean something like gravity or magnetism that I discovered before anyone else could. It was a discovery like, “Ohh so this is what an orange tastes like, OK it really is juicy!!”, thats all, nothing that I intended to give back to the world, it was all just to calm my self. Due to all this going on for a long time, I naturally paid more attention to social sciences, the forces of relationship and human nature that keeps the world working. All this acted as a groundwork as well as the outcome of the understanding that I was continuously developing. I would say I was able to link back to most things in Hindu religion now, and also whatever things I knew in other religions too. OK, so far so good. This is what I learned, (and this is going to be in a pretty analytical language) — religion is nothing but a system of best practices developed over hundreds or thousands of years of observing human behavior, in order to agree with each other and achieve a greater good collectively. In other words, a set of guidelines that help keep everyone within law and order so that the goodness of each one of us can add up into something of value to the society as a whole.

OK, I know this is starting to get a little abstract, but hey, I never said its going to be easy. What I really want to convey is that I started believing religion as something that is totally man made. Even god is man made. Something that is been taught to each one of us ever since we learn to talk (In case you are wondering whether I am trying to push it too hard, come visit India and have a look at the upbringing of a typical Hindu child) so that it is so deeply engrossed into our mind that by the time we start analyzing things around us, we forget that all these things are the things that WE’VE ONLY HEARD OF. Questioning it is out of question. Religion is told as something that is protecting us, but in reality, it is actually something that we’re afraid of. Imagine a lion protecting your home. It won’t let any burglars into your home, but at the same time, it won’t let you go out as well. I believed that religion, or god, is actually a feeling of fear that won’t let us explore infinitely many possibilities a human being is capable of, and by the virtue of such a limitation, it will ensure we’re within social boundaries.

I did not like this idea even one bit. It was like being given a low power motorbike, with bumpers all around it and guarded by a giant monster so even if I try, it won’t let me crash out of a road well set. Now, this is really a setup for total safety, but do I really like it? I don’t think so. What I rather would like is a super bike, without any sort of limitations or restrictions that claim to protect me. I would like to trust my instinct through the journey. I know what I am doing and I want to be in control of what I am doing. I would rather stay on the road because I think its the safest way, rather than because I am afraid of something or someone. I want to trip and rise again, learn from mistakes and decide my own path. I hope you would be able to relate to me.

So, with all this in mind, it was difficult to keep following anything that is a part of the well established religion thing. I saw beyond it. I freed myself from any burden I’ve been carrying so far, and started on a path that I set for myself. I rarely tried to explain these things to anyone because from the very start, the intent of the whole thing was to calm my own self. I did not want to be a guru. I am just setting myself free from everything related to religion. Some people would call this atheism. But I don’t even know what that is. So, I kept walking on this path for a long time, without any problems. Whenever I saw other people following religious practices, I would sometime just smile inside my head and move on, hoping that they are already calm so no need to disturb. Life kept going pretty well spiritually, I was free from all superstitions, I was thinking straight and solving problems logically. Never really needed god, common sense and self-belief was sufficient.

On the other hand, due to my natural tendency to decode things, I was always interested in understanding what goes inside the brain. I was always interested in knowing how human behavior is shaped inside the millions of connected neurons inside the human brain. It was really fascinating to learn a lot of things, even though I have to admit that as a scientific field, psychology and neuro-science is in its infant stages right now (like many other sciences) and we have a long way to go in understanding what really is going on. This is my personal feeling, I am no expert. Anyways, so during all this I started to link the two things together as much as I could — my discovery of the artificial nature of god and the science of human behavior. Gradually building upon the two things simultaneously, I had a “a-haa” moment. I am attempting to write it down below in a really simplistic way (far away from how scientists would explain this because they would know much much more, I am not a scientist, so I don’t care as far as I am able to make it to the point):

Our brain can be compared to an iceberg. The part that is visible over the surface is our consciousness, and the part that is below the surface is the subconscious. The part that is below the surface constitutes of the majority of the brain, and its needless to say that it is totally capable of dominating the brain. So what happens when you are controlled by a part of your brain that you don’t have any conscious control on. It is like riding a wild horse that will not agree to the rider. It will go wherever it wants to go. It will eat when it wants to, jump when it wants to. Isn’t it? So how do to reach from point A to point B in your life riding this horse? Can you predict if you will ever reach there? What you need to do is somehow train the horse to follow the instructions of the real master (you) instead of acting on its own instincts. That’s it. That’s the “a-haa” moment I had — The whole meaning of being in control is to be able to control the horse.

And this is what the ever existent theory of god basically is. It is a hook into the subconscious that (using fear) is able to control it and give it a direction that you want to go in. We all need a way to gain control. Believing in god induces a sort of fear in your subconscious mind that it has to follow a certain set of guidelines, otherwise something bad will happen. It also reassures the subconscious that it is doing the right thing when it (due to fear) is going in the right direction, the direction that the rider of the horse wants to go in. Remember the feeling you have when you look at the pictures of hell and heaven? There is a lot of creative talent, I must say, in the religion field, which makes all these things consumable by taking the visual route. But it is anyways absolutely simple to understand once you start looking at it in the right way. This is where my theory of being in control meets with everyone else’s.

Finally, I want to say that no matter which way you choose, the end goal is (or should be) to be in control. If you are comfortable believing in stories that teach the subconscious to obey its master (you), then keep believing. There are a lot of stories to choose from (each religion has at least one. If you follow Hinduism, there is a whole library), which will dose your mind into obeying you. If you are not comfortable with fictional stuff, you can just simply get to the point directly and take the scientific path. But whatever you choose, you must remember that the real objective is not the path you take or how you do it. The real objective is to be in control, to be the master.

It’s nothing more than that really, all the religious wars are totally unnecessary and BS* as far as I can think.
