---
title: 'I am a Level of Indirection'
date: 2023-03-15
---
I had a shower thought, "What is the difference between an earthquake and a computer virus?" Then I triumphantly thought, "Of course! One is a natural disaster and the other an artificial one." But somehow, the question was not resolved so easily this time. The distinction between a human invention and a natural phenomenon wasn't clear to me anymore.

A natural phenomenon is defined as something that occurs "naturally", without any designer who designed it. For example, a mountain is a natural phenomenon. It is created "naturally" by a series of co-incidences, none of which I am aware of, but I will guess its things like large scale shifts in land masses etcetera. On the other hand, artificial things are defined as things which are produced by conscious human thought, like a poem, or this piece of text, or the screen on which this is text is displayed. Now, are we saying that a poem is not natural, in the sense that nature did not produce it on its own. But that would be equivalent to saying that humans are fundamentally disconnected from nature, as if nature is one thing and human being is another. But I wouldn't be able to defend that claim even if I try. Because I see no other way but to agree that humans are not only nature's creation, just like any animal or plant or rock or rainbow is, but also - they are nature. They are nature, just like a wave _is_ water. Or so it appears to me anyways.

If humans are both a creation of nature and nature themselves, then isn't everything humans create is also a creation of nature? Why must we have this distinction between natural objects and the so called artificial ones, as if the artificial ones are super-natural, or outside of nature? Isn't a poem as much a part of nature as a spider's web is? Granted a mathematical theorem is bought into reality by the rational part of human mind, but that does not distinguish it at a fundamental level from say, an ant-castle. These are differences of form, not of kind. That is, a mathematical theorem requires rationality to derive, and an ant-castle needs hard-wired intuition. But both rationality and intuition are just different forms of competence.

Isn't it valid to think that a human is an invention of nature to accelerate other inventions? Without a human (a rationalizing tool that nature stumbled upon), the so called artificial inventions will be very difficult to arrive at. But that does not mean that nature might have consciously invented humans, not does it mean that humans don't consciously invent things. It only means that, I am just another layer of indirection, carrying out natural processes to produce natural artifacts and feedback into other natural processes. The conscious goal-oriented behavior that I might be much proud of could be just one of those illusions I have. Humans could be nature's way to write computer viruses.