---
title: '45 Mins That Matter'
date: 2018-06-28
tags: musing
---

One of the things that have worked well for me in the past few years of my career is that I have had the good fortune to interact with all kinds of people who applied for a position of software engineer in the company that I work for. While each interview I conduct is different from another in many ways because its dependent on many variables, there is one common thing that I say to the candidate almost every time — that the interview is going to last for about 45 to 60 mins and we will go through some programming exercises during this time. No one seemed to object to this, but I started wondering over time whether this is at all sufficient to evaluate fitness for a programming job. We’re talking about a couple of simple to mid level complexity programming problems and doing our best to triangulate the skill level of a real person based on, what I would say, very much a hunch in the end. Sure, we do note down some indicators that help in making an educated guess, but the sample size is too small for any serious conclusion. This is not a problem that is unique to programming interviews, there are many problems that don’t yield to an objective evaluation readily, and we deal with those problems by using much more “scientific” methods than this. For instance, in a regular data analysis task, we typically take tens or even thousands of samples to converge to an answer that is expected to be taken seriously by anyone. This is a common understanding we have among each other when we are working on real world problems, yet this is not the common understanding we have when we’re evaluating a person for a programming job.

There are three main problems with this:

#### False positives
Since the sample size (time for each interview) is very small, it is way too easy for a person to “make believe” that he/she is a good programmer. After all, it is not expected to go beyond the basics in any area given the time constraints, and a quick web search on interview questions and a plethora of resources for technical interview preparation make it trivial to help make a mediocre programmer look like a pro. If there is anything which the candidate finds uncomfortable to answer, it can be evaded by stressing upon how strong the basics are and how this particular problem will be solved by him/her given enough time because of the strength in basics. Any sane evaluator would know that its okay to not being able to solve a given problem “on-the-spot” as long as a good hold of a “workable” approach is demonstrated. The current (and traditional) approach to this leaves too much room for false positives in my opinion.

#### True negatives
It may surprise you if just after talking about great internet resources I tell you that so many people just don’t use them when they prepare for the interview. Reason could be a lack of time to prepare, lack of awareness of the better resources out there, or just a simple idea that there is no need to specifically prepare for a programming interview as long as you are a good programmer. Whatever the reason, these candidates might come across as “too crude” (specially as compared to the “too polished” false positives) when attempting to answer programming questions. Since a typical interviewer would be expected to conduct many rounds in one day (say, during a walk-in event), interacting with many “polished” candidates can numb down the sensitivity and it can result in perceiving the unprepared candidates as “bad programmers”. I am not claiming that all good programmers will appear crude, because if that were the case it would be easier to spot one, but that a significant number of them will be just unprepared up to the standards set by rest of the competition.

#### Emotional evaluation
This is a big one, but I think also unfortunately the most ignored one. Consider the emotional state of a typical candidate. I would go ahead and assume that any candidate is looking for a job probably because something is not right at his or her current job. Now, there can be some people who would change jobs for minor reasons, but I think it would be safe to assume that most people don’t want to go through the grind of a job change until there is a pressing reason. Either they don’t like their manager or their manager doesn’t like them, or something underwhelming is going on with the current work they have on hands. There could be all sorts of reasons that can cause discomfort at multiple levels and force a job change. And in most cases, the candidate would be looking to get it over with as soon as possible so that things can resume to normal and he or she can do the thing they do best — actually working on a project. This does not look like the environment for expecting highest level of productivity from a person even in a comfortable environment, and an interview room is probably not one of the most comfortable places to chill out. So, it is likely that the candidate is going to perform much worse than what he or she is capable of on a fine day. We’re not even going into other factors like performance anxiety etc. over here. Just the emotional state is enough to tip the balance against their favor anyways. Does this mean we should be a little “soft” when evaluating any candidate? But what about making sure we’re meeting the standards required for the job in question?

Now, I know that there are many candidates for which none of these factors apply, and they can demonstrate their skill beyond doubt. But that does not invalidate these factors, as long as our methods allow a sizable number of good candidates to miss out and any candidates to show up which don’t really meet the standards. The current state of things only work for those who are well prepared and can clearly demonstrate their skill beyond any doubt, or who can masquerade as good programmers for a few 45 minute sessions.

### My two cents for a solution
Ok, so what could be done to make things better? I am thinking of an approach that primarily addresses emotional state problem, and then takes on the other problems. A service that constantly samples skill level regardless of whether or not a person is looking out for a job change would surely give better quality data points for evaluation. It could be implemented by means of a subscription program that sends out “computer adaptive random” problems periodically (once a week? a month?) and asks for submission of a solution in set amount of time. There are already services present that assign an objective score to a programming solution by running test cases (eg. HackerRank). At a philosophical level, it is something on the lines of a bank loan that constantly gives you a chance to pay a part of your mortgage every month, proving your good financial status in small chunks over a period of time and maintaining a credit score, rather than asking for a “big-bang” proof when you need another loan. It would also eliminate a good slice of guesswork at the time when a person actually needs a job as the score would reasonably indicate the skill level which is built over a period of time. Only problem would be to validate that the person has been honest with the service (so the score can be trusted), but that I believe would be a much easier problem to solve because the score itself sets a reference point for asking the right questions during an interview. If the service can expose detailed data about what problems the candidate has solved in past to obtain the score, then the interviewer can cross verify by asking more relevant questions. On a primary level, the emotional state can be expected to be much less of a problem when justifying the past problems the candidate has already solved. It also makes for a better, more effective conversation I think.

### How is this a win-win?
For programmers, it makes sense to invest towards maintaining a good score so that in the future, a good score is a good head start for a job search. For employers, it gives a very efficient search capability by looking up candidates in a particular score range. And then, one the day of an interview, the job becomes more efficient. Interviews can become shorter and more meaningful. For the service, it can be a sustainable business model by offering good subscription plans and maintaining good quality scores that can be trusted, not to mention the potential plug points for job search engines.

Ok, this sounds great. So who is building it? :D