---
title: 'Concrete Mind Plastic World'
date: 2020-01-02
draft: true
tags: musing
---
I was born in 1985. And the world has certainly changed quite a bit since then. And I can't help but reflect back on the role technology has played in it. But have I examined it properly?

### Old world
A couple of decades back, life was having slightly more uncertainty. You wake up early for school on a winter morning and find out there is no electricity today morning. You are waiting for the school bus for 30 minutes and realize maybe you missed it today because maybe you were a couple of minutes late at arriving at the pickup point and maybe today the bus was on time. You ask your father to drop you to school and find out that your maths teacher hasn't showed up today, so you are going to have some other class during the first hour. You returned back from school and are excited about the cricket match today, only to find out that today your TV antenna is disoriented due to wind or something and someone needs to fix it if you want to see the match. You gave up on watching the match and gathered with friends to play cricket in the street instead. After 10 minutes of play, somebody hit the ball into a nearby corn field and you spent the rest of the evening searching for it.

What about lives of elder people of the time? Were they any different? Not really. Booking train tickets, clicking photographs, going to movies, investing money, shopping, … almost everything in the lives of regular people were having a slightly more amount of uncertainty than now.

Agreed, not all of these accidents will happen on the same day, but they would show up frequently enough to be affecting our everyday lives and the way we used to look at the world.

### New world
Due to many many inventions in almost every field, we have made things much easier for everyone. Unreliable electricity in your area? Install a generator or UPS and don't worry about it ever again. Want to never miss the school bus? Here's an app you can use to track the bus. Still missed the bus, sure no problem - just call an uber. Check the school calendar to find out if everything is going to be as planned or if there are any deviations to it, all while having your breakfast. There is no need to rely on the shaky aerial antenna anymore for your TV when you have a high speed internet connection and live stream of every sports event on the planet. And if you are playing cricket and somebody hits a ball in the nearby corn field (assuming its still there), you can just get back to home and play some video games instead of wasting time searching for the ball.

If you are an adult, you get train tickets instantly on your smartphone so you can do the entire vacation plan in a matter of minutes. You get to see photographs instantly and come to know one of the people in the photo was not smiling enough. So you can click another one to fix it, and then another one to fix that slight error in posture someone made, and so on. You can go to movies knowing exactly the seat you are going to sit at and pre-book the snacks you are going to have while watching it, which will be delivered directly to your lap by the way. Your investments are scheduled and routinely tracked and compared with other competing investment opportunities, and you can instantly withdraw money from them and re-invest in anything else. Or, spend instantly on an expensive watch which will be delivered to your door step at a scheduled date and time chosen by you.

And the best part is, we are not stopping here. If this is not heaven, I don't know what is!!

### The pattern
There is one thing that becomes more and more clear as we look at all the inventions we are doing. They are making our lives easier. And what exactly we mean by making life easy? Its just reducing the amount of uncertainty. Looking back further, we can easily confirm this pattern. Wherever there was uncertainty, we invented something to reduce it or eliminate it. We invented agriculture to reduce the uncertainty of obtaining food day-in and day-out (compared to hunter-gatherer lifestyle). We invented currency to reduce the chaos we have in determining the value or worth of an object we possess. We invented insurance to reduce the uncertainty of our loved ones' lives if we are dead sooner than we expect. We invented diagnostic machines to reduce the uncertainty of our health and disease. And so, on. If we look around, we find thousands of examples of inventions, each one of which is reducing uncertainty of some kind.

Some things are not visible to the eye, but they are still inventions, and they are also reducing uncertainty. The current big data and analytics wave that's upon us is a large body of inventions aimed at reducing uncertainty of various kinds. For example, there are algorithms that reduce the uncertainty of fluctuating markets by analyzing large amounts of past data and inferring a pattern out of it to zero-down on the key factors that influence the market in certain ways, and then there are some algorithms that try to predict the future with good accuracy based on recent past events in the domain. There are algorithms which are trying to work on reducing the uncertainty of the source of a particular news based on its content, or to reduce the uncertainty about what the author actually feels while he writes an article. If we look closely enough, the pattern is everywhere and is undeniable.

Its clear to realize that if there is one thing we all universally hate or are afraid of, its got to be uncertainty. We have been investing most, if not all, of our potential in inventing things that reduce uncertainty and make the world a more deterministic place. For us, certainty and determinism is comparable to pleasure, and we seek it actively. To be fair, its probably not just humans who seek it, although we undoubtedly are most successful at achieving it so far.

We have been marching ahead with this guiding force and doing inventions, faster than ever (Do a google image search on patent statistics), reducing uncertainty one invention at a time. In the past decade, I think its apt to say, "Where there is will, there is an app". With a little more attention, we can try to see the bigger picture - where are we going with this?

### The effect
I guess a warning is in order at this point. Things are going to get a little bit gloomy and dark beyond this point in the essay. So, if you are not prepared for it (perhaps your pizza order was canceled unexpectedly and you were forced to place an order at your second favorite place instead of your favorite place, or something else of that nature), then I'd suggest you return back to it later when things are relatively peaceful in your life. Because this can be unsettling.

OK, so with that warning in place, here's a look at what we might be headed at. First off, lets be clear that I am not saying uncertainty or chaos is always a good thing, or we are wrong when we seek to make life easier for us. By all means, we should do that. The main point I want to bring to foreground is that there are subtleties to watch out for. So, what are the subtleties? In short, not everything must be seen as a potential problem to solve. And I am going to argue that its overall a better world if we are aware of these finer details and make decisions keeping them in mind.

#### The plasticity of the world
With every invention we make, we essentially are bending the world and nature to our will just a little bit. Sometime long back, humans realized that the world around us is not as concrete as it looks - perhaps everything in it is subject to be conquered, given the right knowledge and a will to conquer it. When we invented fire, we came to realize that the hostile world full of night time predators has started become a little less hostile for us. Now the predators are afraid of attacking us when we are asleep, or at least they will learn to be afraid once we burn one of them while others watch. We realized that the food chain is also not as concrete as we thought it was. We can tame wild animals and domesticate them to later either slaughter them, steal their milk, or use them for manual labor to create a stable food supply for ourselves. No need to be a part of the food chain anymore. And we haven't looked back.

At some later point in time, we realized that we no longer need to bend in the face of darkness anymore. We invented fire torches and later on electric bulbs to conquer darkness that was preventing us to make progress. The scientific revolution was essentially a result of a deep realization of the plasticity of world, that we can decode nature and then bend it to suit our needs. Then came steam engines, electricity, the printing press, the internet and big data algorithms, and we surely don't intend to stop. Why would a sane society stop?

#### The plasticity of the mind
With every invention we make, we eliminate the need for ourselves to be plastic. Sure, we can stay in dark after sunset if we want to, but we don't have to. And so, we eliminate the need to be flexible around the question of whether we need to stay in dark after sunset. Of course, we don't need to, and we won't! We are not required to compromise our lifestyle for going out to the farmer's market and buying veggies. Of course, we don't need to, and we won't. The market may be uncertain at the moment, and throwing some curve balls at us, but we surely don't need to succumb to it when we can invent algorithms to guide us, and we won't.

A modern man feels a lot less need to compromise on his desires than ever before in history. And given the nature of human mind, which is good at identifying and pursuing the path of least resistance when presented a problem, its reasonable to assume that he won't pursue a path which can be replaced by an easier path with less mental flexibility requirements. Not many would, and not for long at least. With this power comes a general tendency to be inflexible around the annoyances of life. It doesn't usually occur to us if we are missing out on some experiences due to the aversion to annoyances and uncertainties. At least it didn't occur to me ever before. Since we know the world is plastic, we would like it to be plastic enough so we don't need to be plastic ourselves. Which is to say, we can become concrete. Any occurrence which forces us to bend, hurts more than it ought to, or it used to.

I'm starting to doubt if this is heaven. Or it will stay so if we continue to double down on it.

### Separating the grain from the chaff
There can be some inventions which are indispensable if we want to make progress. For example, the invention of better architectures for city cannot be ignored if we want to grow its population. We cannot hope to go too far without inventing public transport systems, for example. But at the same time, there are some inventions that must be not that critical. Not everything is critical. So, the inconvenience we have around photography on a holiday for instance, is something that might we left unsolved without much impact on the quality of holidays.

While digital photography might be highly valuable to health care, the other application area of personal photography is not that convincing. And so is the case of almost every invention. We need to give some thought about the application areas of inventions too when we invent something. As a society, when we build products, we need to let go some areas that promise profits, so that we can preserve the good parts of human experience.

The responsibility is two-sided. As a consumer, its useful to think when consuming a product or service too. If we truly are in control, we must be willing to recognize such subtle yet valuable things in our lives and be ready to suffer just a little bit of inconvenience to keep them alive. We have a pretty useful mind, which is able to bend and is malleable in the face of uncertainty. Its good at absorbing uncertainty and convert it into useful and pragmatic life experience, something far more valuable than the pleasure we get by eliminating all inconvenience.

A plastic mind might lead to a better life than a concrete one. Its important to realize that there is another word for concrete in this context - brittle.
