---
title: 'Data, Information and Technology'
date: 2020-10-23
tags: musing
---

### The shadow of a mammoth looms upon us
Are we living in a world that is about to spin out of our control very soon and cause imbalances in nature like never before? Latest statistics from the almighty video sharing platform Youtube shows that we are uploading in excess of 500 hours of video content every minute and watching more than a billion hours of content every day. And this is just one service out of thousands of popular data accumulation services out there. Even if we take the top five most popular technology companies in consumer software domain, we will find hundreds of services which are specifically designed to collect more and more data from its users and also to keep growing the number of users. There is vitually no limit to how far we seem to want to go before we will satisfy our desire to "win" by means of data.

Why is storing and processing more and more data a bad thing? One simple answer - there are no free lunches. We live in a physical world with physical constraints, which means to get something we need to always spend something. The cost of running data-centers which host these gigantic amounts of data runs in figures which rival the most expensive programs humans have ever endured. Companies like Apple and Google spend more in running their data centeres than NASA spends in preparing for a Mars mission. The key metric to look here is power consumption. The state of the art "intelligent" machines as of now use technologies which are far more resource consuming than the average run-of-the-mill data processing applications. The neural networks which we are proud to show at consumer electronics events are like hungry monsters which suck out large quantities of elecrical power to stay alive and entertain us. Their sizes run in Gigabytes and their footprints are hard to ignore.

All this would have been tolerable had we moved ahead on the renewable energy sources front, but unfortunately we are not there yet, and whether we like it or not, all of us are going to pay the price of the technology gap we have right now.

### Is the mammoth our friend, though?
The bright side of the data revolution requires no introductions. Never before we as humans have been so strong as we are now and a large part of our success story must be attributed to our ability to collaborate. The invention of internet and the world wide web is probably the most important invention in last few decades. And the way the web works is by allowing each one of us to share data with each other. Just like our body is made up of billions of individual cells, the web is made up of billions of small pieces of data. Your Facebook profile is a small piece of the web. We take these individual pieces apart and the whole web will start to break down.

Collaboration isn't the only good thing that comes out of the web. The web has shown us true meaning of freedom probably for the first time ever. Today, it doesn't matter who you are and what your beliefs are. The web is neutral to you and welcomes you to share it with others. Of course, there are going to be people who will misuse the system to create and nurture evil, but this is as far as we can go in experiencing true freedom. Social problems aside, the web doesn't inherently discriminate, and its undoubtedly a worthwhile achievement.

### The dualities of data
Now we turn our attention to exploring the beauty and the cost of the ongoing data revolution on the web and certain perspectives on what role we ought to play in it. It comes in the form of studying various dualities.

#### Good and bad data
When things get too big, its only natural to think whether their sizes warrant their benefits. Its very human to wonder if there are parts of it which can be taken away without doing any harm to the whole. One could wonder if there is a way to isolate pieces of data which are objectively "bad", and by doing that if we can help out by limiting the growth of such pieces of data. If we take human anatomy as a running metaphor, these parts appear like cells which are infected with some disease and it would benefit the body if we have a mechanism (immunity) to kill these parts selectively. It seems this mechanism is in some way necessary for a successful functioning of the body.

However, before setting with a backpack, its critical to examine the assumptions carefully because sometimes picking the wrong metaphor is all it takes to pursue a long journey that ends in regret. The assumption here is essentially that some data is inherently "bad" data. That some data is either of no use or its just serving the devil, in either case the whole would be better off without it. But is it true though? Or is data just neutral - neither good not bad? I tend to lean on the side of neutrality of any technology, not just data alone. For this, I rely on history. If we pick any piece of technology - the wheel, gunpowder, printing press, double-entry accounting, and so on… I find that none of them had elements of good or evil in them inherently. Its simply because I can imagine good deeds as well as evil deeds which can be done with the help of these technologies. Technology only enables us to do things more efficiently, it doesn't guide us one way or another. By the same token, I think data cannot be good or evil in itself.

#### Right and wrong data
But surely, one might think, there are some pieces of data which are plain wrong. Its information we are ultimately talking about and we know there is a notion of correct information and wrong information. So isn't wrong information made up of bad data? To examine this, we must examine the link between data and information. Its true that information is made up of data (in most cases anyways), but information is not the only thing that is made up of data. I imagine data as a set of lego bricks. Its true that a miniature replica of Taj Mahal can be made from lego bricks, but it doesn't mean that lego bricks are only supposed to build Taj Mahal replicas. In fact, lego bricks can be used to build all sorts of things. Some of them could be beautiful, some ugly and some so ordinary that it will be hard to classify them. If you try to build a replica of Taj Mahal, only then the question arises of whether or not the replica is accurately representing the original. In all other cases, its just a miniature building which represents someone's opinion of how Taj Mahal should have been built, or how Taj Mahal appers to the builder, or any other meaningful idea, or nothing at all - sometimes we build things for fun too. In case of data, some data could be considered to provide information, but other data is simply not in that line of business.

If we limit ourselves to just information, is there a way to provide some score to data based on how correct the information is? This touches upon one of the oldest unsolved mysteries of human thought - the question of "knowing the truth". On this, I tend to lean towards the sceptic idea that its impossible to know anything with absolute certainty. Pick anything which you think you know for certain and subject it to rigorous scrutiny of alternate explanations. Eventually, it will break. In other words, its impossible to exhaustively rule out all alternative explanations, due to practical reasons if nothing else. Hence all knowledge is at best probabilistic in nature. Again, if we look at history, the "knowledge" about something only represents an temporary consensus on that topic, which is temporary because it can break anytime someone comes up with a viable way to test an alternative hypothesis which turns out to be a good enough explanation, or someone comes up with an alternative way to look at reality. Then there is a period of (temporary) confusion because of split brain on that topic (the grey areas of science) eventually leading to formation of a new temporary consensus, and so on. The fact that its temporary is probably the main reason why it is exciting to pursue a science based career, or more generally, to have a scientific mindset.

(I am of course leaving aside certain kinds of information, for example information like the height of a given building, and information that can be derived from known facts by applying leak-proof logical reasoning. We do say we "know" about the facts that we derive from these methods, which is true for practical purposes, but even these are not excluded from certain questions and arguments about human perception, human rationality and nature of reality as a whole. I think that would be off-topic because these are not the kinds of information we are after when we are collecting truck-loads of data anyways).

Does this mean we cannot simply reject any information as wrong information? I think yes, we cannot reject any information as absolutely and certainly wrong. All we can do is tell how aligned some information is with the current consensus. I don't want to confuse alignment with absolute correctness. This tendency to confuse the two has been the reason for many regrettable acts in my past, and I have learned from those. In fact, I tend to encourage the unaligned ideas more because I don't see any other way to respectfully pursue the project of "knowing the truth". We might never get there, but the journey is what we live for, not the destination.

#### Useful and useless data
Now, the question of utility. There might be no inheretly evil data, but there could be just plain useless data. Can we assign some utility value to individual pieces of data and decide which parts are more valuable to us and which parts less so. I think this is essentially what Google's famous PageRank algorithm sets out to do. And this is essentially what the ranking subsystems of any search engine set out to do. But how does a search algorithm or the PageRank algorithm know which pieces of data are more valuable than others? In most cases, it relies on human input or some form of input which utimately depends on human input. It has to, because it is evaluating the utility for humans. Any system which does not depend on human input at all may do an excellent job at assigning utility based on some criteria, but it might not be compatible with our utility function, so its not interesting in current context.

So, what is the nature of human input which guides search algorithms or ranking algorithms? In most cases its some form of feedback collected from humans. In other cases, its constructed by observing human behavior passively. For example, its very common for Youtubers to ask the viewers to "like, comment and subscribe" to their channel simply because these are the ways of providing direct positive feedback to Youtube's algorithm that a given video has some utility. Youtube also provides a "dislike" button to collect direct negative feedback. And these feedback are very significant in determining the utility. But there are other passive approaches too. For example, Youtube also has a recommendation engine which given you some potential options to watch the next video. If you click on any of those, you are displaying a human behavior trait which is passively absorbed by Youtube and most likely fed back to be used in deciding the utility of its content. Another example of passively observing human behavior is to look at hyperlinks present on all the pages on the web. The pages which have more incoming links have a higher utility score than the ones that have less. The pages that have incoming links from high utility pages have even more utility values.

The central point of emphasis here is that human feedback and human behaviors are the driving forces for determining utility of data. And the only way we can have an objective measure of utility for a piece of data is to have an objective and deterministic measure of human thought and behavior. In other words, if there is a way to predict human experience and behavior, it might lead to reaching an objective measure of data because the machine will no more need humans in the loop and hence the utility measure will be objective (free of human subjectivity). Obviously, we are not there yet. So at the moment, the utility value of any piece of data does exists, but is subjective. Which means for one person it may be low utility, but for another high utility.

Finally, referring back to the previous section about right and wrong data, the utility only represents the alignment with current consensus of the data. In that sense, the data with low utility is important precisely because it doesn't align with current consensus. Its possible that at some point in future when the consensus changes or the preconditions for the consensus change, the data with low utility becomes high utility and vice versa. So, once again, I tend to say that data is neither useful nor useless - its neutral.

### Back to the mammoth
I find myself neutral on most of the discussion regarding the duality of things. Which means taking action and not taking action are two sides of the same coin to me. By taking action we are participating in one way to look at something, while by not taking action we are participating in the other one. We are participating regardless of what we chose and there are consequences to participation in either case. We need to look at the big picture. The only reason there is a mammoth to worry about is because we created it and we fed it. And why did we create and fed it? Because we wanted to not worry about certain other animals. So, our desire to be free of the worries of the time past has lead to our worries of today. If we are to learn anything from it, we can say that our desire to free ourselves from the worries of today will lead to our worries tomorrow.

When we make things easy, efficient, comforable or affordable, we simulataneously make other things hard, inefficient, uncomfortable and expensive. All desirable things are almost like a trap door - you can go inside it without even noticing it, but you can't get out. On the other hand, not going through the door becomes more and more difficult because of the pressures we create. Capitalism is one such pressure. In presence of capitalism, its very hard to suffer from the lack of wealth. The free speech movement is another such pressure. In presence of free speech tool like the world wide web, its very hard to suffer from the lack of free speech. The door is right there, and its inviting us in all the time. The subject of studying why Capitalism is a trap door, or why anything is a trap door is very interesting, but lets save it for some other day.

The mammoth is currently our friend, but one who quickly turns into our enemy if we chose to abandon it later.

> "Ok, enough of philosophy already. Tell me how to fix things for today…"

Well, the fix for today is to just worry about the immediate problem of today, which is the footprint of the mammoth. We can think of ways to make it more efficient to store and process data. An algorithm which decreases the cost of data processing by one order of magnitude buys us enough time until the data expands to the next order of magnitude. A hardware innovation that reduces the power consumption of an operation (say matrix multiplication) by one order of magnitude buys us time until data grows to that point. In short, all we are doing when we innovate is that we are buying some time before the challenge comes back - bigger and stronger. But that's tomorrow's problem.

### Assorted examples
Based on the insights we gain from above trains of thought, we can try to quickly analyze some special cases or examples related to technology and innovation. This allows us to test the philosophy in various scenarios and see if it holds up.

#### The email spam problem
We used to have postal mail, which was slow and inefficient. The email innovation revolutionized this space and made it ridiculously easy and efficient to send mail to each other. When it became easy, cheap and efficient the problem of spam email appeared. Hundreds or even thousands of emails started flooding our inboxes every day and it was necessary to invent something to solve this problem. So commercial organizations funded projects which ultimately led to the email spam detection algorithm. Now we have spam filters, and we have put a snooze on the problem.

But the story is not over. At present, there are people trying to invent new and powerful ways to get through the email spam filter. Spams are becoming smarter and progressively indistinguishable from an email written by a human. The battle continues and the funds keep flowing from commercial organizations into research groups on both sides.

Overall, one thing we did achieve out of this is that we created a mechanism to keep the money flowing.

On social front, now we write a lot more emails than what we used to write earlier. But the information content of each email is far less than the information content of earlier postal mails. What used to be necessary to convey did not change. It was getting conveyed via postal mails before, and now its getting conveyed via emails. No more, no less.

#### The click-bait problem
We created software platforms to publish articles about events and ideas. It became ridiculously easy to publish something on the world wide web. When news agencies published articles, they started noticing that there are some attention thieves putting advertisements on their pages. They use knowledge of human psychology to lure their readers into clicking away from their pages and into their competitors pages. This was a novel problem bought upon us due to the nature of web - anything can link to anything else, plus the capitalist economy fueled by advertisements. Anyways, the commercial organisations which were profiting from this started funding research groups to detect and eliminate these "click-baits" from the advertisements. Slowly research groups started paying back and today we have reasonable algorithms to detect clickbaitiness of a given text.

The battle continues. There are people trying to come up with novel ways to steal web traffic from their competitors such that the innovations done on clickbait front can be neutralized. Funds keep flowing into both sides of the battle groups. Once again, we successfully creted a mechanism to keep the money flowing.

On social front, we become more congnizant of protecting ourselves from falling to the traps of these click-baits. But when the click-baits start becoming ineffective, they become smarter and indistinguishable from good links. Overall, enough people still click on them and the story continues. No more, no less.

#### The generative text problem
This is related to the click-bait problem. A democratic candidate wants to win, and the way to win in a democracy is to have majority of people in your favor. In order to affect a social mindset at scale, we need to have enough documents on the web in forms of personal opinions that convey an overall sentiment in favor of the candidate, or against the opposition. Until yesterday afternoon, the only way for having such documents was that a human writes them one document at a time, carefully articulating the opinions on a real person to suggest action or change in mindset. Or to report real news which shows facts in favor or the candidate or against the opposition. Obviously, this was not scalable. So corporations started pouring funds into research groups to develop bots that would generate text indistinguishable from real human written text. It would create articles and fake news at speeds unmatchable by humans. So whoever has keys to this bot can affect the desirable social change. We are just beginning to see results of the research, and from a pure technological perspective, it is quite impressive and neutral.

This is very much like a preparation of a battle at this point than an actual battle. But I think we can see where this might go. If people on both sides of an issue get hold of the bots, they will just cancel out each other on average, and leave a lot of rubble as side effects for software engineers to clean up. If one side has the bot, it will win effortlessly and immediately make sure it never gets out of power. Either way, what a waste it would be on the honest scientific research done to achieve this.

I took example of politics as one potential area, but of course its not limited to politics. Its not surprizing to see why funds will keep flowing in this direction for quite some time to come.

#### The military technology race
This is a very old running battle. Every nation has fights going on with its neighbors for control of territory. The effective way to fight this is to strengthen the military technology. So funds are flowing into research groups to develop more and more deadly weapons, and also more and more defensive technology that can protect from enemy weaponry. We started fighting with sticks and stones, graduated to swords, bullets, missiles and so on. Today, there are enough nuclear weapons in the world to destroy the planet several times over. We are not satisfied with destrying just once. We like to keep backup just in case we need to destroy it again, multiple times.

After the devastating demonstration of usage of bombs in World War II, it has become more of a game of threat. Every year we display our best weapons and defense systems on television to show our military power to neighboring countries and they do the same. The fear of being on the receiving end of threat keeps the funds flowing into military research groups and the battle continues. Once again, another mechanism to keep the money flowing and keep justifying the tax rates.

### Summary
When it comes to technology, even if its neutral on its own, its very hard to keep it isolated from all the other forces acting in the world. There are good forces and evil forces and technology supports both of them without any discrimination. Even when we think that we are developing something to support only good, the evil lurks in from the shadows and steals it for its use. At other times, evil is the reason why technology makes progress and the good guys have to lurk in the shadows to obtain it. Sometimes, its hard to tell who's the good guys and who's evil.

Then there is the idea of taming and feeding a beast to protect us from other predators, and at the same time fearing that any day it might turn against us. Even if we are able to keep it from turning against us, we still have to keep feeding it more and more as time passes and the beast grows. At some point, the beast might grow so big that we might not have enough food to keep him happy or under control. We know it, and we can feel the threat, but we can't help but move forward anyways.

In short term we see money flowing into research of various topics and it gives us the illusion of progress, a promise of happiness coming in the future. In long term, we might realize that everything cancelled each other out and what we achieved was only a lot of flux, a lot of currents and tides - just enough movement to keep us busy in our everyday mundane lives, day in and day out. Everything changes so fast before our eyes, and yet nothing changes when we look at the totality. Its weird.